Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. In 1982, science fiction lost one of its
most brilliant, innovative, and original writers, Philip K. Dick, dead at 53 of
a stroke. Dick left us just as he was finally being discovered by a large number
of readers, both science fiction fans and non-fans. Dick had struggled since the
early 1950s to write science fiction full-time, and he produced an immense
number of novels and stories, including the 1963 Hugo-winning novel The Man in
the High Castle. However, for a long time, his fans were a relatively small
number of loyal followers. Right. For years, Dick's writing just never really
caught on with the majority of science fiction fans. This was especially true in
the 50s and early 60s, when fans were more interested in hardware science
fiction. But with the social changes of the late 60s and the advent of the new
wave, Dick's writing achieved a more deserving status. We talked with a friend
of Dick's, Paul Williams, who was known in science fiction for his perceptive
portrait of Dick in an article in Rolling Stone. Others will remember Williams
as a rock journalist and as the founder of Crawdaddy Magazine. Williams met Dick
at the 1968 World Science Fiction Convention in Oakland. They became friends
immediately. Williams graciously consented to talking about Dick with us. During
most of his writing career, Dick made very little money. We asked Williams why
Dick stuck to writing in the face of poor economic returns. I think a real
commitment, first of all, to the ultimate, I don't know if I want to say
seriousness, but that's really it, a real commitment to what he was creating and
what he wanted to say, that always when he's written it's been because he had to
write. And it was equally true that it became the only way he could make a
living. You know, it's a classic freelance writer situation where even though
you're, you know, okay, if you only get $1,500 for a science fiction novel, then
what you have to do to stay alive is write six of them in a year, which he came
pretty close to doing at one point.
But Dick didn't stick strictly to writing science fiction. He wrote mainstream
novels as well. It was not until early in the 1960s that he gave up trying to
become a successful mainstream writer. And even then, he didn't give up.
Although it felt like that to him at the time, he just put it away on the back
burner, having tried very, very hard for 10 years. The first 10 years, while he
had his first 10 or so science fiction novels published, he wrote a mainstream
novel for every science fiction novel he wrote. So really, he was writing two
novels for $1,000 advance, one of which would be published in an A-double novel,
and the other of which would go from publisher to publisher and just be turned
down. And there are still 10 or 11 of those unpublished novels. So there are in
existence several manuscripts of mainstream novels written by Dick. We asked
Williams if there is any chance these will ever be published. I think that it's
inevitable.
Bill had mixed opinions about their quality, and I haven't read most of them.
But it seems clear, although we may be surprised, that there's nothing as
polished or as good as Confessions of the Craft Artist, which I think is
actually one of his five or six best books.
But because of the interest of Bill's work, it seems inevitable at this point,
that one way or another, they will most or probably all be published within the
next 10 or 20 years. But probably still by small publishers, not by New York
publishers. More about Philip K. Dick with Paul Williams on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas. Tortoise entrepreneurship society is now offered as小 Tom Okias
www.tob spending.org
VAU
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon. The late Philip K. Dick published some 35
science fiction novels and a few mainstream ones as well. Among Dick's well
-known science fiction novels are the Hugo Award winning The Man in the High
Castle, Martian Timeslip, The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch, The Androids
Dream of Electric Sheep, and Ubik. Dick's career abruptly ended after the
publication of three novels very different from all the others, Ballas, The
Divine Invasion, and The Transmigration of Timothy Archer. The last one is not
science fiction. As Paul Williams told us in our last show, Dick wrote a number
of mainstream novels which have yet to be published. Dick's science fiction
novels and stories are generally plotted around the character's perceptions of
reality. We wondered if Dick were categorized as a science fiction writer simply
because there was no other convenient pigeonhole in which to place him. Williams
said no. Well, he was truly a science fiction writer and I think that the
primary meaning of that is that you belong to the club and you learn by reading
science fiction. And he came up writing stories for all the science fiction
magazines and then he started writing novels for Don Walheim at A's and was read
only by science fiction readers. And was certainly aware of, you know, as a fan,
as a reader, all the science fictional plotting devices and the whole, you know,
concept of the genre, the sense of, you know, those of us who read science
fiction. And I think that's what it means to be a science fiction writer in a
lot of ways is to come up from that world and to stay within that world to
whatever degree, at least with part of your work. And he definitely did that. He
wasn't necessarily satisfied with that. That's easy to understand. But he did,
although he was not a great reader of it, after adolescence or whatever, he
really loved science fiction. And the people that he wrote for and the people
that he communicated with were all pretty much in that world. At least, yeah, I
think it diversified more in the last 10 years. But still, I would consider him
very squarely a science fiction writer. Williams also told us how Dick felt
about his own work. He always had a very kind of self-deprecating or humble
attitude towards his work, while at the same time always giving you to know
somehow that he really took it as seriously and respected it as much as his most
ardent fans. What I'm saying is that he really knew how good it was.
But he was able to be very humble about it.
The apathetic response of publishers to Dick's experimental mainstream efforts
bothered him. What frustrated him, and he was very frustrated by it, was
primarily that he didn't have the freedom to write what he called experimental
mainstream novels as well. And of course, it was a tremendous victory for him,
finally, posthumously, but he was aware of it before he died, when the
transmigration of Timothy Archer was published in hardcover to the first
publisher that he submitted it to after writing the novel and so forth.
Or actually, before writing the novel. So, it was something that he always
wanted to do, to write this kind of book. The ghettoization of him, as a science
fiction writer, kept in front of us for a long time. More with Paul Williams on
his friend Philip K. Dick on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. Today we're going to look at two of science
fiction author Philip K. Dick's best novels, with the help of Paul Williams, who
was a close friend of Dick's. The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch and The Man
in the High Castle both appeared in the early 60s. It is interesting to note
that both made their first appearances in hardcover. That's significant because
most of Dick's works first appeared in paperback, 22 novels in fact. It is for
this reason that the newly instituted Philip K. Dick Memorial Award honors the
year's most original science fiction paperback. The Three Stigmata of Palmer
Eldritch details a future in which human colonists on Mars routinely use
powerful hallucinogens to relieve the dreariness of their plight, hard work, and
loneliness. Then the mysterious Palmer Eldritch appears with a new drug so
powerful that its hallucinations totally overcome reality. Many of the passages
in the book describe hallucinations and illusions so realistically that the
reader might assume Dick had had first that experience. We asked Williams if it
is true that Dick had never used hallucinogens before he wrote The Three
Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch. We also asked him to comment on the report that in
the aftermath of his experiments with psychedelics, Dick was afraid to read the
proofs of The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch. It's true that he had never
taken LSD or I think any psychedelic drugs before he wrote The Three Stigmata of
Palmer Eldritch. He had had experience with amphetamines.
And as for then taking LSD and reading The Gallies, that's possibly true, except
that it was years before he read The Gallies and maybe years before he took the
trip also. But he was afraid of it before he read them. He was, he always
claimed anyway, too scared to read The Gallies when they sent them to him. And
he didn't finally reread the novel again, according to what he always claimed,
until a number of years later.
But I'm sure there's no question that it scared him. It scared him while he
wrote it. And at one point he told an interviewer that he wrote it to kind of
exercise a terrifying vision of the man with the stigmata that he was seeing in
the sky while driving to the shack on the California coast that he was doing his
writing in. And so again, it was very real to him and terrifying while he was
writing in as well as a while reading it. I think, by the way, that it's a
brilliant novel.
The Man in the High Castle The Man in the High Castle is presently considered to
be Dick's major accomplishment. It's an alternate world novel which describes
the United States in the aftermath of the Axis powers winning World War II. A
sidelight is that characters in the book learn that in an alternate world, the
Allies have won. They learn this through the I Ching, the Chinese Book of
Changes. It has been reported that for a period, Dick himself consulted the I
Ching, but that he repudiated it. We asked Williams if this is true. He did, in
several interviews, and he stopped using it. Since I originally was introduced
to the I Ching by Phil's book and by someone else who had learned about it from
Phil's book, and still use the I Ching, I never took Phil's repudiation very
seriously. But he did have the experience that many people have that the
book, the oracle eventually told him, you know, to stop. That it wasn't useful
for him to keep asking questions of it. And his feeling and what he said was
that, you know, it was actually trying to steer him in some wrong fashion. But I
think that that kind of incidental effect of the man in the high castle of
introducing the Chinese Book of Changes to so many people who then introduced it
to the whole culture is very fascinating. We'll talk about Philip K. Dick's last
three novels on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This has been
the Science Fiction Radio Show.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon. Science fiction author Philip K. Dick
produced a large body of novels and short stories during the nearly 30-year span
he wrote. Most of Dick's novels dealt with perceptions of reality, that is,
questions such as, what is real? Is that person real or is it a robot? Is this
all an illusion? However, the last four novels Dick produced were quite
different from his previous efforts. A Scanner Darkly came out in 1977. It's
Dick's tribute to all his friends who died from the effects of drugs, and it's a
warning to those contemplating their use. Dick's last three novels, Valus, The
Divine Invasion, and The Transmigration of Timothy Archer, are related
thematically. They all have spiritual, mystical, religious overtones. We
wondered if Dick wrote these three novels after undergoing some kind of change
of life experience. Here Paul Williams, Dick's friend for many years, comments.
It's certainly something new. I mean, he, in fact, saw these three books, these
last three books, as a kind of a trilogy, even though they have different
settings and subjects. The thematic material is extremely related. And it comes
out of his own personal experiences and one sort of mystical experience in
particular, and also out of at least six years of really intensive research into
theology and philosophy and, in many ways, you know, the spiritual history of
human beings, at least over the last 5,000 years or so, which he just totally
immersed himself in, originally on the pretext that he was doing research for
Valus, which ultimately turned out to be true. But, and there was a period of
about three or four years where he didn't write a novel, and we all wondered if,
you know, if he would again. And I'm sure he wondered. So that this
extraordinary work, particularly the last three books, definitely, as you say,
comes from a change of life, so they're not in the sense of, you know, going
down to the church and getting religion. Williams then goes on to tell us about
the experience, a revelation which awakened it. There was an awakening in him
of, brought about as exactly as he describes in Valus, by an incident, I guess,
in 1975.
where he's sitting in his car in a very Southern California town, Santa Ana, or
Fullerton, around there, and is kind of zapped by this pink phosphine light. And
nothing was really the same again after that, but, I mean, he spent a couple of
hours in a, really, a very subtle kind of other world. And it was only his sense
of the importance of this experience that really gives it its way. In other
words, exactly what he went through, somebody else might have shrugged off who
didn't have his particular powers of perception and interest. That experience is
described in Valus, and in slightly different terms in the profile of Dick and
Charles Platt's Dream Makers. We asked Williams about the objective reality of
Dick's experience. It's a totally subjective experience, you know, even as he
describes it, right? It's something that happened to him. That, you know, in
fact, one of the issues that comes up for him is how do you prove something like
that, you know, to yourself, as much as anyone else. But absolutely no question
that it was very real to him, and that, you know, the horse lover fat character
in Valus is as real a self-portrait as you could find. So Dick's last three
novels, definitely a departure from his previous work, were the result of Dick's
own personal experiences. On our next show, we'll take another look at this
group of novels.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show,
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. Fans of science fiction author Philip K.
Dick realized that Dick's last three novels, Valus, The Divine Invasion, and The
Transmigration of Timothy Archer, represent a significant departure from his
earlier work. As we discussed with Dick's friend Paul Williams on our last show,
these novels have a spiritual element which was brought about by a vision Dick
experienced in 1975. Only time will tell, but some feel that these three novels,
especially The Transmigration of Timothy Archer, will eclipse The Man in the
High Castle as Dick's most important work. Valus is Dick's somewhat
autobiographical sketch of horse lover fat, and in it are the details of Dick's
life-changing spiritual encounter. The Divine Invasion, the most overtly science
fictional of the three, is a mystical treatment of the salvation of Earth in the
approaching Armageddon. The Transmigration of Timothy Archer is not science
fiction. Rather, it's an experimental mainstream novel similar to those Dick
tried for years to publish. It's based quite closely on the life of the late
Bishop Pike, whom Dick knew for some years. Here Paul Williams tells us a bit of
what Dick was driving at in his final three novels. He became obsessed with the
revelations that he had around, and his questions about what was that happened
to him and why. And ultimately, his answers, which in effect are his answers,
and in a sense it's a culmination of his entire work, his answers to tentative
or whatever, to all the questions he'd been asking in all his books. What is
reality? What is history? What's really going on and why? And what is the real
nature of the forces here? And as somebody quoted Einstein as saying, you know,
Einstein was asked if he could, a reporter asked him, what would you say if you
could have the answer to any question? You know, what question would you ask?
And Einstein immediately answered, is the universe friendly?
And that was certainly a burning question on the mind of Philip K. Dick in every
book he ever wrote. And there is a kind of extraordinary revelation in the last
two or three books, in which, while still giving that incredibly penetrating,
ruthless vision of the way things really are, and often in still quite a
depressing tone, he nevertheless comes through with a very strong conviction
that yes, we are ultimately in the hands of, or at least strongly under the
influence of, a basically friendly preacher much greater than us that is on our
side in a battle that is far from decided. We asked Williams if some of Dick's
conclusions might have been based on the tenets of any organized religion. You
could make this as similar to the Christian myth, or the myth of almost any
other, you know, great world religion, or as different from it as you want it
to. You know, you could make a great case that, hey, this man believed, you
know, the straight party line, or you could make a great case that he was a
heretic whose books should be burned, you know, by every organized and
disorganized religion in the world, so that there's no easy conclusion as to,
because it is so uniquely his vision, as to what the meaning of the vision and
the information part in his last work is. But there seems no question that he
begins
to really make some very strong statements about what he finally thinks is going
on. Philip K. Dick will be sorely missed. He had his ardent fans, and his last
three novels will continue to gain him new fans from outside science fiction. We
can always hope they'll go back and read his early works.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.できrennia.com verse 1 Thank you.